APRA NoI for Near-IR cubesat spectrograph concept

The NASA Kepler/K2 missions revealed the existence of thousands of exoplanets orbiting other star systems, proving that planets outnumber stars in our Galaxy.  The bulk characteristics of exoplanets have been assembled through refined characterization of exoplanet host-stars, yielding a massive dynamic range in planetary system mass, density, multiplicity, orbital semi-major axis, and  stellar insolation.  However, atmospheric and surface properties that shape a planet's habitability elude us; we cannot yet distinguish whether a given Earth-sized exoplanet is habitable like Earth, toxic like Venus, or frigid like Mars.  Refined planetary atmospheric characterization awaits the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), capable of capturing exoplanet transit spectroscopy--- repeated spectra of planet-host stars in- and out- of transit, yielding the transmission spectrum of the planetary atmosphere.

Projections of exoplanetary atmospheric signal strengths suggest that exoplanet transit spectroscopy may be beyond the limit of JWST's technical feasibility.  The all-sky NASA TESS mission will deliver a few tens of exceptionally bright (V<6) transiting exoplanet host-stars, based on planet yield statistics from Kepler/K2.  The saturation of these stars in JWST will likely preclude their exoplanetary transit spectroscopy measurement with existing or planned space-based facilities.  These exoplanet systems will be amenable to spectroscopic transit follow up with small, low-cost telescopes.  In our forthcoming NASA Astrophysics Research and Analysis Program (APRA), we propose development of a near-infrared spectrograph concept devoted to exoplanet transit spectroscopy of bright exoplanet host stars.  The compact design of this spectrograph will fit inside of a low-cost cubesat platform, dramatically lowering the overall instrument cost. The device development for this concept must occur now in order to be ready for a launch date shortly after or during the TESS mission.

The APRA program will enable us to develop two key enabling technologies of our instrument concept.  First, we will develop custom cross-dispersed silicon immersed diffractive grisms to achieve both high spectral grasp, and a small overall instrument volume amenable to a cubesat platform.  PI Gully-Santiago is an expert in developing silicon immersion grating technology.  Second, we will develop intra-pixel sensitivity characterization of near-IR detectors.  Intra-pixel sensitivity characterization provides resilience to spacecraft-induced thermal instabilities, which lead to the dominant noise sources in both Kepler/K2 and likely for TESS as well.  The dearth of lab-measured sub-pixel detector characterization currently limits many science cases in K2 data, for example.  Through the APRA program, we will develop lab-based metrology techniques and concepts for in-situ, space-based calibration systems.  Through these device development and metrology efforts, we will enable hundreds of parts per million transit spectroscopy on the sample of bright, TESS-discovered planets.

The optical/IR calibration mechanisms we develop will be useful for any applications requiring high precision time-series photometry or spectroscopy with astronomical detectors.  We will also develop a prototype mechanical and optical design for a cubesat employing our technologies, with a stretch goal of an end-to-end lab test of a prototype.
